Started 6 Mar 

Planning to include the vzsum and its derived momentum contribution
in the outputs. 

added vzsum to all places where there's a corresponding vtp2sum,
including output.

added into the tools. 
However, the problem with that is that the tools are then not going
to work with old outputs that don't have the vrsum. Because there's
the wrong number of variables. So made that read conditional. 

Got Leo's fgen to fgencol and modified that too. 

postproc seems to work still.

10 Mar
Found that there's a problem with mpi on unity. It appears to be able to
run scepticmpi but it does not complete.

Rebooted mpd on all nodes.

Made a trivial mpitest program. Tried to run it. Got

[hutch@unity sceptic]$ mpiexec -n 20 ./mpitest
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node30:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node02:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node26:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 

[hutch@unity sceptic]$ mpiexec -n 36 ./mpitest
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node21:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node05:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node06:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node01:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node17:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node30:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node02:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 
problem with execution of ./mpitest  on  node26:  [Errno 2] No such file or directory 

Obviously what this means is that some of the unity nodes do not have access
to up-to-date versions of /beo_codes/hutch/src/sceptic. They can't find
the program I just created. This probably means that there are incompatible
versions of scepticmpi running on different nodes. NFS problem, I'm sure.


14 Mar 07

Trying to track down the forces associated with collisions and the 
related asymmetries. 

There are inaccuracies associated with exit, reinjection and collisions. 

The test for leaving the domain is done after moving but before colliding.
Colliding addresses possible collisions for the step just taken. However
if a particle has exited the domain, it is then not included for possible
collision in the prior step. A collision, if it had occurred before the
particle exited, might have prevented the exit. Therefore, particles have
a tendency to leave more rapidly than they should. 

Reinjection moves the reinjected particle by an amount that is a
random fraction of the assumed prior step, placing it inside the
domain.  When a collision of this reinjected particle is detected, it
is backtracked then collided. The backtracking might mean that the
particle collided outside the domain. If it does, it may not make it
into the domain on the succeeding fractional step. In that case,
currently, the particle is reinjected at the original end-of-step but
with the collided velocity. This is an approximation that will tend
to place particles inside the domain with on-average lower inward normal
velocity than they should have. It might be better to ignore collisions
that occur outside the domain (when backtracked).

Both of these effects appear to bias the particle injection by causing
particles to leave the domain faster than they should. However, the
effect definitely ought to decrease as timestep is decreased, since it
is proportional to \nu dt.

16 Mar

Established that decreasing dt while s.dt is constant does not substantially
change the error.

Revisiting single processor verifications.  Modified pdiag to document
some upstream versus downstream comparisons, and to limit the r-range.

Found that there appears to be a significant discrepancy at low
collisionality between the observed ion distribution and the analytic,
but not at high collisionality. But doubling dt seems to reduce it and
the distribution is then pretty correct.

Also found there is a density discrepancy in the costheta plus versus
minus regions, which appears systematic. When dealing with x30, we need
an upstream/downstream asymmetry of about 30/ \pi rmax^2 to give a force
of 30 units (nT r_p^2). This requires about 1% asymmetry. This much is
present in the sums I get, although the potential asymmetry is somewhat
below this = few x 10^-3 

23 Mar

Implemented angle distribution testing in fvinjecttest. We get the 
mean and 1st moment correct to better than 1 part in 1000 for 1M 
injections. Thus the reinjection is correct, as far as one can tell. 
This can't give anything like the 1% asymmetry.

28 Mar 
Implemented kt5 kt6 which do no backtracking. They now seem to work
and kt5 gives good particle distributions, but there are still force
errors and density drop. Therefore it does not seem that I have 
succeeded in fixing the problems with reinjection.

29 Mar
Showed that v1 kt5 k.1 gives comparable density drop (.97) for s1000 d.1 and 
s5000 d.02, showing that the density drop is not a function of timestep.
With k.001 the density drop is reduced (~.99), so it seems that collision
frequency is important. Similarly, k.01 is ~99.

k1 starts with a big density drop ~0.8 and then drifts up slowly through
the run, ending with about 0.94. 
There's a slight error on the downstream side of the distribution function.
The observed distribution there, rises above the analytic, so the
distribution is a little less shifted overall than analytic. I wonder if
this error is enough to be significant.
The initial error is substantially lower (~.93) when run with .d02, which shows
perhaps that there is a timestep issue at these high collisionalities.
This might be a multiple-collision issue, I suppose. The pdiag error is
much reduced by the smaller timestep. But the density drop error, while
not quite as large, is still substantial: 0.96.

Therefore there is an error that is d-dependent but there's also one that
is not. The one that is not is rather weakly dependent on the actual
collisionality. 

Try artificially multiplying riest by .95. Got density ~1.03 as expected.
That hack gives the response expected.

Try increasing nthfvsize to 150. Get about .99 this seems better than the
previous kt5, k.1, d.1, s1000 (.97). Yes it definitely is.
Try nthfvsize 300. Does not run correctly for some reason. 
It's a dependency problem touching makefile makes it work.
There might have been a problem with my prior change. This one seems
to have about .975. So we don't have clear convergence. nthfvsize=100
seems to have about .98. Not clear that we are chasing a real effect.

30 Mar

Implemented independent test of angle integration in fvinjecttest.
This prints out the difference between its evaluation actot and that
of fvinjinit: qthfv(nthfvsize). Athough the agreement is not bad, there
are significant discrepancies:
./fvinjecttest -ni1000 -v1. -t.01
actot,qthfv(nthfvsize)  3.63838959  3.54334331
This is 3 %. At -t.1 the discrepancy is about 1% or slightly less.

Note that at high v/t the one way flux that these correspond to should
be 1/2\sqrt(2) = 0.35355 times sqrt(T). 

./fvinjecttest -ni1000 -v1. -t.0001 gives
actot,qthfv(nthfvsize)  353.555237  338.884613
which shows that actot is accurate, but the qthfv is substantially low.

Increasing the number of theta or v steps did not significantly change
this problem:
Finished initialization on grid 100 100 100
 actot,qthfv(nthfvsize)  353.555237  339.285217

Dug around inside fvinject to try to find the cause of this discrepancy.
Eventually found that in 
     vzfvi=min(-vtrange,-vtrange+udrange*ud)
      vzfva=max(vtrange,vtrange+udrange*ud)
udrange, which was set at 5. is the culpret. Increasing to 10 I get.
Finished initialization on grid 50 40 40
 actot,qthfv(nthfvsize)  353.591309  351.67923

Changed the mesh to be uniform, which together with increasing udrange
removes the error to of order 0.3%, which is pretty negligible. I don't
really know if this was a significant issue in the actual runs.

31 Mar
Try putting the Eneutral acceleration just before the collision. 
This makes the apparent n-error positive, the opposite sign from before.
It reduces as the -c enhancement drops. Clearly there is a significant
effect from the timing of the Eneutral. Final value about 1.04. 
This is all -kt5 -k1. Slight downward shift of distribution. 
Try half of the acceleration at end. Get close to 1.00 density. 
Still some distribution bias (looks similar). 
Pretty good 0.98 result with -k.1. Pdiag distribution looks way better.

-kt1 also seems to be better with this Eneutral location. Actually somewhat
better with all of Eneutral at end. But at -k1. we get elevated result
with that. With half of Eneutral at end, it is still possible to see a
noticeable asymmetric effect on density at the last cell, with -k1. and
-d.1. This does not disappear with Eneutral at end. 

-kt5 does not have the visible edge density perturbation at -k1; with 
Eneutral at end or half at end. This seems to show that there is a substantial
error arising from the collisional backtracking, which leads to a deficit
in the last cell on the downstream side (and extra upstream).

-kt1 still has density deficit at -d.01, about .975. -kt5 also, but these
may be at the noise limit. 

Summary
_______

A small error (of order 1% in typical conditions) in the fvinject integrations
was identified and fixed by increasing the velocity ranges.

Moving the Eneutral acceleration to be immediately before the
collisions has a significant effect increasing the apparent density,
but proportional to timestep.

The -kt5 scheme of not backtracking substantially reduces the asymmetric
edge perturbation when collisionality is very strong compared with the
-kt1 scheme which uses collisional backtracking. 

All of these effects appear to be in the right direction to correct
residual errors. 

4 Apr 07

Implement advancingc, which moves the collisions into the padvnc routine.
This works fairly well. There is a hit of a few percent on speed (when 
collisions are not on) but that is more than compensated by a different
efficiency gain that I found. 

There are puzzles when a collision takes place because of the
acceleration step in the form of dtnow=(dt+dtprevious)/2. That
expression is reasonable for a leap-frog scheme, since the velocity is
to be advanced from its value half way through the previous step to
its value half way through the present step. However, for the Eneutral
acceleration, it is not clear this is correct.

When a collision occurs, the velocity starts from the neutral
(stationary) distribution. This is at the start of the next time step,
not half way through it, the way I have implemented things.  It is
therefore correct to accelerate the particle using Eneutral for the
entire time from that collision to the next collision when considering
the distribution function. However that is not really consistent with
the staggered time view of the leapfrog scheme.

5 Apr 07
Further debugging of advancingc seems to get reasonable distribution with
either Eneutral implementation. Use the accel+Eneutral for now. 
Also corrected the errors in the icycle implementation. 

Runs give very similar results to the prior kt1: force error of -27.
Slightly low apparent density as before. Overall things are astonishingly
similar to the old collision approach. We don't have an explanation for
the asymmetry and density deficit.

Try putting dtprec to dtin after reinject. Earlier it was left as dt, which
might well be shorter, which might have an influence. Actually this is not
really correct. It probably should be made equal to the twice the 
equivalent step used in reinject to place the particle inside the domain. 
That would then be a proper treatment for regarding the particle as having
the velocity drawn from the analytic distribution at exactly the boundary,
and that point as being half way through the previous spatial step. On 
average, twice the step equivalent will equal dtin. 

10 April.
Found bug in through-probe code. Corrected but it seems far too small to be
the cause of what I am currently doing. Correction does not change deficit.
Rechecked fvinit.

Consider the follow reinject inaccuracy: A reinjected particle is moved
by a random fraction of dt*v, before being positioned. Similarly it is
accelerated before being placed. This ignores the possibility of a collision
in the fractional step that is being modelled before placement. This is
an inaccuracy. It means that the particle ends up further inside the 
domain than it should: a position error. Eneutral acceleration is being
applied in the reinjection only if icolntype is >4. That is supposed to
compensate for collisional effects on velocity, but it does not fix
the position error.

Trouble is that the density deficit is caused by there being MORE
reinjections than expected: rhoinf is 2% too high. This is verified by
doing a simple calculation of npart/volume. It seems off hand as if
reinjection placement further inside the volume than reality will reduce
the nrein. Well, let's think about that. If we thought we had just a drifting 
distribution, it would mean that the particles would start nearer to their
exit on the other side of the domain. That might shorten the time they 
spend in the domain which would mean an increase of nrein. 

Increasing velocity to 2 from .5 does not substantially change the 
deficit. (-k.05)

Trying removing the icycle approach by setting to 1. This seems to reduce the
rhoinf error by about 1% to about 1% instead of 2%. Also makes a big
difference to the external force error. Increasing the denominator of 
icycle calculation to 50 from 20 also reduces error nearly as much.

Halving the step size to -d.05 does not significantly change the rhoinf.

Summary
_______

There is a bias being introduced by the icycle process, which accounts for
about 1% of the error. Using icycle=1 avoids that and gets a rhoinf that
is within 1% of correct. (Getting 64.0 vs npart/vol=63.66). See notebook.

No dt-dependence has been discovered with icycle=1.


11 Apr 07

Change the handling of reinjection in advancingc so that we simply use
the rest of the cycle for the reinjected particle. We start it a tiny
bit inside the boundary and then just process it for the remdt time.
Have to set remdt randomly for now, because the amount of time taken
in the previous step is not currently calculated at the outer boundary.
Find that we have a remaining deficit of about 0.5%, rhoinf=64.0 cf 63.7.
This is substantially larger than the integration error in the finjinit,
which is of order 0.1%

Create a tag in the sceptic repository old-advancing, which marks the
prior version of advancing, and reinject, prior to the changes described
here.

The 63.66 value of npart/volume is artificially low, because the presence
of the sphere causes an inner volume to be substantially free of 
particles. If that volume were only the sphere, then for -x30 it is only
1/30^3 which is about 4e-5 of the domain. However, with substantial drift,
the deficit will extend a long way down stream, so that the effective
volume is noticeably larger. In point of fact, if the ions are mostly 
moving in one direction, as they are with v=2, t=.1, then it is a
good approximation that the volume is a tube that extends one domain
radius from the sphere. I.e. the equivalent volume deficit is 
\pi r_p^2 r_d out of 4\pi/3 r_d^3, which gives a fraction

	f_v = 3/4 r_p^2/r_d^2

For -x30 this is approximately 1/(30^2) = 1/1000 which is smaller than 
the 0.5% I am looking for, but not totally negligible. 

The finnerave correction for rhoinf (which increases it) is also
quantitatively about 1/1000. So there's 0.2%. 

Running a scaled -x300 case, I get phiinf=-2.752 => rhoinf=.06359. This
eliminates the discrepancy, which is highly suggestive. 

Case with low collisionality 5e-4 gives actually a higher rhoinf: 65.0
but shows signs (at 1000 steps) of non-convergence. Perhaps not surprising
since there's so little damping.

20 Apr 07

Trying some quasineutral cases. I get a big perturbation at the edge.
This appears to be caused by incompatibility of the advancingc code with
the older injection schemes. On reflection: of course! Advancingc does
its own adjustment of the reinjected particles. All the old versions have
it in the reinjection code. It has to be removed from all of that.
Done:
oreinject
ogenreinject
maxreinject

Also, since this changes many files, make the advancingc.f the advancing.f 
and the old one advancingo.f and adjust makefile. 

Now the transition to the new advancing scheme is hopefully complete. It 
is not completely tested however.

1 June 11

Reminding myself about convergence. Actually convergence criterion is a 
bit too strict, which is why often with the original steps it takes
them all, which was 2.5*NR. In comparison with the 3D code. That takes
about 60 steps of the CG relaxation. 
However,
	sor steps are half-steps.
	sor steps maybe faster by maybe a factor of 2. 
	At least coptic's steps are substantially faster than sceptic3D. 
	Result is that there's definitely less than a factor of 2 benefit.
	And in some cases no benefit with CG.

11 Aug 11

There's an error in reinjection with collisions when vneutral!=0. 
The distribution used does not account properly for it. Instead,
all that happens is that fv() uses 
      common /distfunc/ud
      fv=fvcx(vz,ud)*exp(-vx**2)/1.77245385
with ud being just the drift velocity normalized to sqrt(Ti).

If vneutral is non-zero, then the fvcx distribution applies in the 
frame of reference of the neutrals. (In which the neutrals are not drifting.) 
So if uneutral is the equivalent neutral velocity we ought to use
   fv=fvcx(vz-uneutral,ud-uneutral)*exp(-vx**2)/1.77245385

Did all that. Had also to hack around in fvinjecttest because that was
then comparing some non-applicable analytic expressions with the actual
data. 

15 Aug 11

Adjusted the velocity range choice in finjinit to account for the neutral
as well as the vd velocity and avoid the zero-integral errors.

23 Sep 11

Idea to track the _trapped_ density as well as the total density.
Inside chargetomesh test if particle is trapped, (which should not 
need to call ptomesh again). If it is, then distribute it to a new
sum ptsum that is the trapped particle sum. This ought to be of negligible
cost.

First we need a version of istrapped that does not call
ptomesh. Created.  Found that the costs of calling this for each
particle each timestep are about a 6% hit. Implemented a separate
chargetrapped routine for accumulating this into a new array
ptsum. Added reduce calls to collect from mpi. 

Need to do a stepsave average for the trapped particles, because their
numbers are much less generally than the total particles, so the results
will be garbage unless decently averaged. Added array diagtrap for this
purpose. It needs to be treated in such a way as to convert from psum to
density. This is: rho()=psum(ir,ith)*volinv(ir)*(nth-1.)*np/rhoinf
i.e. we need to do 
diagtrap(ir,ith)= (diagtrap(ir,ith)*(nstepsave-1.)
 +ptsum(ir,ith)*volinv(ir)*(nth-1.)*np/rhoinf) /nstepsave
This is done for the other quantities in chargediag.
But I'm inclined to add a call just after rhoinfcalc, which is
done just after chargediag. Did that.

Trying now printing out on small meshes, but diagtrap is not correct.
Overflows and zeros. Need to figure out what's happening. There are in
fact many trapped particles.

One problem was that I had not added the diagtrap to the common block.
Did that. Adding ptsum also gives a more sensible looking result. 
The ends of the array are zero. Like rho. I guess they are BC locations.

Corrected a few things in the makefile and MFConfigure to suppress
spurious warnings.

Now we need more sensible output. Probably ought to write out the array
just as we do rho, at the end. Find we need to double the theta-edge
values as before for rho. 

26 Sep 11

Done all that and seem to have it working together with an updated
postproc that puts the line on to the -o logarithmic plots.